Several people have mailed me recently, sharing
that they're questioning their own religious beliefs.
Some are feeling hollow, some are frustrated,
some are feeling fearful and isolated.
Others are feeling cold and logical,
approaching things analytically.
Reading their different stories, I'm prompted to share
my own transition to atheism with them
— and whoever else is interested —
taking into account both the emotional
and the cognitive components of that switch.
So here are two videos, each addressing
one of those aspects
and using psychological models as frameworks
to contextualise the psychological events involved.
In this video I'm going to explore the cognitive
side of my transition from christian to atheist,
using a concept from person-centered theory
called congruence.
In person-centered theory, the self is sometimes
represented in two components:
'experience' and something called 'self-structure'.
Experience refers to the bald data
we gather through our five senses,
and from internal and visceral sensations.
Now there's clearly a bewildering volume
of data available to the senses.
Person-centered theory suggests we have to find ways of processing this data
into manageable, meaningful chunks and patterns
—and that we do this through our self-structure.
This term refers the mechanisms we use
to categorise and organise our experiences,
to give our world structure —drawing on beliefs,
associations, values, and reasoning.
For simplicity, in this video I'm going
to call this component 'beliefs'.
Person-centered theory suggests that we instinctively
strive to understand the world
to integrate our beliefs about the world
with our sensory experience of it.
And this overlapping area is called 'congruence'.
A lot of our early organisation of the world
comes through naming experiences in the world:
fork, water, blue, chair.
Lots of these are essentially neutral.
Others will take on emotional associations.
When we get burned by fire
our senses register pain.
But not all associations are based
on our own experience.
As a child I learned, for instance, that some parts
of the human body were 'rude', even 'bad'.
Did my senses tell me this? No. Other people did.
But why would I take on other people's meanings
and definitions, when it's not my own experience?
Person-centered theory uses the term 'conditions
of worth' to describe the environment in which
the child learns the behaviours and attitudes
that get rewarded with approval and love,
and the ones that will be punished
with disapproval and rejection.
To fit in, and maintain the approval so essential to its survival,
the child takes on the views of its guardians,
not just as opinions but as absolute truths.
In doing so the child moves away from its own authentic, congruent experience.
And as the child moves out of congruence,
mismatches arise between experience and belief.
Person-centered theory describes
two kinds of mismatch:
denial and distortion.
These are probably best
demonstrated with stereotypes.
John's been taught that 'all gay men are effeminate'.
This isn't based on reality. But it will now dictate
his mental reality in the following way.
Only effeminate men will
get through that stereotype filter.
John has no concept for masculine gay men,
so when they come along,
he simply fails to register them in his awareness.
This is denial.
But what if a masculine man
openly announces he's gay?
This is a more direct challenge
to John's stereotype — one he can't ignore
—so instead he twists reality to fit the
stereotype. This is distortion.
Hence, John's false stereotype
continues to feel true to him.
How does all this relate to my religious upbringing
and conversion to atheism?
As a child I was taught god existed. I accepted
it as truth because others told me it was true.
It wasn't based on any kind of reality
accessible to my own senses.
But it created filters, just like John's gay stereotype
that would then profoundly affect
what information I was able to let in.
Solid scientific facts that conflicted with my belief
were now denied .... or distorted.
People were distorted.
I was distorted.
As this distorted framework of belief was built up,
I learned to hold incredible dissonances in my head,
so that human morality was completely
flipped on its head when it came to god,
who performed the most appalling acts, punishing all
humankind for the sins of two individuals,
drowning the entire population of the planet
except for Noah and the contents of his ark,
condemning his children to eternal torture in hell.
It all made sense. And even where it hadn't,
I'd learned very early on that it was wrong to say so.
This dangerous-sounding word 'blasphemy' would
be used if I did, and would instantly stop all discussion.
Ironically, what loosened the grip of these
non-indigenous beliefs I was defending,
was when I first attempted to prove them.
A religious education teacher had challenged me
to explain why I believed what I believed.
I talk about thisexperience at greater length
in the accompanying video — 'transition to atheism'.
But basically
when I couldn't come up with any good answers,
I asked the other christians in my life.
I knew the answers had to be good
and that 'god moves in mysterious ways' and other such
ideas weren't going to impress my teacher,
so — for the first time — I pressed
a lot harder with my questions,
and was far more discriminating about the answers.
I was convinced my fellow christians
would be able to supply the answers.
And I was stunned to find they couldn't.
Having never experienced god myself, my entire
belief hinged on the fact that other people had.
But suddenly I saw how easy it was to explain away
the things they were giving as proof of god.
Things like a sick person getting better after prayer.
Well, some sick people get better. Some don't.
What about the ones who don't?
'It's just their time to go to heaven.'
So for people who do get better, it's not
their time to go to heaven? 'That's right.'
So, if it's already predetermined whether
it's your time or not, why pray at all?
And why claim it was prayer that made them better?
'Er ....'
The critical thinking I permitted myself, in order to get
the most convincing defences of christianity I could
allowed me instead to see the truth.
That I was just following people,
who were following other people,
and so on until who knew when.
None of us trusting in our own
authentic sensory experience,
but instead trusting in the distortions
implanted in us as children.
As my distortions collapsed,
I was able to let reality in.
I was able to see that it's never wrong to
demand good solid answers
to questions about anything you're asked to believe.
And if the responses to those good solid questions
are threatening or dissuading in any way,
something's wrong —and we should ask ourselves:
'What's so fragile that it can't stand up to sustained
scrutiny, and needs threats to protect it?'
Which seems the more likely candidate to you?
I was able to see that the concept of hell
is a child's concept of punishment —
that child-like fear of all-engulfing unimaginable
consequences for doing something wrong.
When we grow up, we realise parents aren't actually
into inflicting
unimaginable consequences
on their children —for anything.
And if someone does want to torture their children?
We call them a psychopath. End of.
It's perhaps religion's greatest coup that
it's managed to drive such an efficient wedge
between a person's own senses and their beliefs.
Since my shift back to greater congruence
— I've had many theists and supernaturalists
approach to challenge me,
each with their distinct brand of beliefs, but all so far
with one standout aspect in common:
The requirement that I deny
my own authentic experience.
This is in sharp contrast to science,
which has no need to do this,
In fact, it encourages the opposite.
It values the accessibility of information to everyone
to investigate for themselves, using their own senses.
I actually have no inherent loyalty to the
idea of there being a god or not being a god.
God suddenly pops up, makes an appearance
— then, believe me, I'll believe.
My loyalty is to reality, to reliable evidence, to what
is available, through whatever means, to my senses.
That's what makes me an atheist — nothing else.
Yes I know all the stereotypes —all atheists are anti-god, anti-society, rebellious, immoral.
And I believe I've covered stereotypes already.
My atheism is purely about a demand for evidence.
And those who scorn demands for evidence, by the way
— who scorn 'scepticism' — are being
completely disingenuous.
If someone came along claiming
to be the second coming,
is anyone out there really trying
to say they'd just uncritically accept that?
They wouldn't be at all .... sceptical?
I find it hilarious just how fanatically sceptical
some anti-sceptics get
in trying to tear down the solid science
that opposes their supernatural beliefs.
We all demand evidence. And that's a good thing.
Reliable evidence is where the circles meet.
Evidence could be seen as a congruence generator.
But not when it's split like this.
We all demand evidence for things we find
hard to believe. Let's go one step further.
Demand evidence for the things
we find easy to believe.
And let's pass on to our children
the very best of our knowledge —
not the very worst of our unexamined dogmas.